[Docs] GNSS-Denied Configuration (#25955)
PX4/PX4-Autopilot: docs/en/advanced_config/gnss_degraded_or_denied_flight.md

:::

PX4 is default-configured for outdoor flight with a reliable GNSS signal, but it can also be set up in "dead-reckoning mode" to more gracefully handle environments where GNSS is intermittently degraded or denied during flight.

This section describes the configuration options, and the circumstances in which they should be used.

## Overview

PX4's EKF2 navigation has two modes for handling when GNSS data is determined to be unreliable:

- **Automatic mode** (the default): Used for flying outdoors in environments where a GNSS signal is expected to be largely reliable.
- **Dead-reckoning mode**: Recommended when you want to fly missions or other position controlled mode when there is intermittent GNSS loss, such as when flying under a bridge, from outdoors into an indoor setting, or when there is GNSS jamming (it is not suitable for pure-indoor use, as a GNSS signal is required before arming).

::: info
Dead-reckoning mode helps for both Fixed-Wing and Multicopter vehicles.
MC vehicles benefits more because it can hover when transitioning between sensor regimes.

> FW needs continuous accurate velocity/position during the entire mission arc, making sensor transitions trickier.

Author: I'm not sure what you are saying here.
- Are you saying that an MC that loses or gains GNSS will hover for a bit while it fuses or stops fusing data? How does that help if you're in a position controlled mode - you'll still jump when the position updates because the system suddenly realizes you're not where you are supposed to be.
- Ditto for FW. You always want accurate position estimate. I think you might be saying that an FW doesn't adjust so well to position estimate changes because it can't, for example, fly sideways?

Reviewer: Only comment would be if we want clarity here:

Dead-reckoning mode helps both Fixed-Wing and Multicopter vehicles.

Multicopters can stop or hover while the estimator transitions between GNSS and non-GNSS sensors, which makes these transitions easier to manage.

Fixed-Wing aircraft must maintain continuous forward flight, and require continuously accurate velocity and position estimates throughout the entire mission arc. Because of this, any drift that accumulates during GNSS outages has more pronounced consequences when GNSS recovers or sensor fusion modes change.

Author: I dont' understand the explanation. I don't think it helps either becaues it doesn't tell a user what changes for them/what they should DO.

But I think 99% of people will gloss over it. THerefore resolving to allow merging.

:::

### Automatic Mode

In Automatic mode the EKF2 resets if GNSS is lost and no other sources of position are available.
This can result in a [position loss failsafe](../config/safety.md#position-gnss-loss-failsafe) and may trigger a shift into a mode that does not require global position, including stopping missions.

This is desirable if the GNSS signal is likely to be recovered quickly and there are no mechanisms to estimate position when GNSS is unavailable.

Use Automatic (default) when:

- Flying in open sky with reliable GNSS throughout the mission.
- You want the EKF to reset to GNSS when it becomes available again.
- Operating in environments where GNSS is either good or completely unavailable (binary state).

### Dead-Reckoning mode

In Dead-reckoning mode, EKF2 stops fusing GNSS data when it becomes unreliable and prevents EKF2 resets, provided there are other sources of position or velocity data that can be fused.
This ensures that the vehicle can continue flying missions and other position controlled modes when GNSS is lost.

> When GNSS is recovered the vehicle position estimate will be updated, which may cause jerky movements (in position controlled modes) if the estimate has drifted.

Author: ```suggestion
When GNSS is recovered it will be fused with other measurements when tests indicate it can be trusted. This may cause jerky movements in position controlled modes if the estimate has drifted.
```

This mode relies on having additional position or velocity sensors and must also have a reliable GNSS signal at boot.

Use Dead-Reckoning when:

- **Transitioning between GNSS and non-GNSS environments** (flying into buildings, under bridges, through tree cover).
- You have **redundant sensors** (optical flow, VIO, rangefinder, quality baro) that can maintain position estimation.
- Flying **missions that cross GPS-denied areas** where you want continuous operation rather than failsafe.
- **Urban environments** or other areas with intermittent GNSS quality.

> - You want to **avoid EKF resets and jumps** when GNSS recovers (smoother transitions).

Reviewer 2: Yes, according to Marco in this [talk](https://youtu.be/CMGQJNPiTJg?list=PLYy2pGCdhu7zVkfXvJkAEbT0V6CoyakMg&t=1168) yes in normal non dead reckon mode ekf2 resets if we lose GNSS, but with dead reckoning enabled EKF2 does not reset.

For the second bullet point, this is a good question. I would imagine that you don't failsafe for a timeframe -at least until some flag invalidates local position if optical flow is problematic at high altitude and/or error accumulates (IMU drift is a function of time). I am not sure what the vehicle behavior will be when GNSS starts being fused again (especially if we are in position mode with stick input). This implied "jump" is what we probably need to do more IRL tests to see.
 
```
Dead-reckoning mode: If estimated position/altitude is close enough to measurements, fusion resumes; if too far apart, data gets labeled as faulty.

> - You want to **avoid EKF resets and jumps** when GNSS recovers (smoother transitions).

Author: I'm following up with @haumarco because I'm not sure this is fully understood. What I sent him was:

----

The question is "what happens when you lose GPS" and why is this different between automatic and dead reckoning mode. I have seen the video from the conference.

My understanding is that in automatic mode
- if you lose GNSS your test ratio will drift off 1, and after a timeout you'll have an EKF2 reset.
- The effect from an EKF2 point of view is that you start estimating the position from fresh GNSS data (which might be rubbish) and start integrating your variance and so on.
- This might well result in the vehicle thinking that it's position has changed. In a non-position controlled mode this would likely have little effect. In mission, hold, position mode etc the vehicle would try to move to where it is supposed to be, which could result in abrupt movement.

- There is no behaviour to handle GNSS being restored - i.e. we're not looking at fusing the data gradually or similar. We are always just trusting GNSS and GNSS might later be detected as lost (how?) after which there would be a failsafe trigger. This might drop us out of a mission or whatever.

- The summary being "in automatic mode, resets are bad because they might well cause jerky and unpredictable movement behaviour, and completely losing GNSS will cancel a mission even if you have other position data". Is that right?

My understanding of dead reckoning
- if you lose GNSS your test ratio will drift off 1 . EKF2 will stop fusing the unreliable data and just integrate what data it has. We don't have a hard reset and we don't trust GNSS automatically - we don't get big position corrections because our vehicle trusts its position.
- If GNSS is recovered enough that test ratios are below 1 you'll start fusing it again. My GUESS is that this is a gradual correction of position, so you will get the effect of a position reset, but it will be gradual.
- You never failsafe on GNSS unless you lose all sensors required to get position - i.e. both position and velocity sensors.
- The summary being "Dead reckoning continues missions when GNSS is sporadic or lost. There might still be some position corrections when GNSS is recovered, but these will be more gentle. Is that right?

> - You want to **avoid EKF resets and jumps** when GNSS recovers (smoother transitions).

Author: Marco's clarifications

auto:
>if you lose GNSS your test ratio will drift off 1, and after a timeout you'll have an EKF2 reset.

only when you dont have any other position source (external vision or auxillary global position).
We have GNSS-checks which can lable the data as invalid, which would would prevent the fusion/reset.

Summary 
> auto:

In automatic mode we trust the GNSS data, while knowing it could drift for a bit. Since we know it will eventually recover, we prefer a reset to it. We dont expect harmful spoofing/jamming where the standard GNSS-checks cant detect the destructive data.

> dead-reckoning:

correct. I wouldnt call it "more gentle", it's just the normal fusion again...
